okay
so
here we are again
um
so i'm gonna finish real quick uh proof
of
um
a theorem that i stated last time due to
cantor so let me recall the setting
so um last time we were
this is finishing up
what i have to say about cardinality
which remember is
a notion of
size of
sets and
at the end
for a given set a
then we defined the power set of a
to be the set of all subsets
of a
and last time for example we did several
of them or looked at a few different
power sets
and
a simplest example is that the power set
of the empty set is the set containing
the empty set
in particular
the power set has
one more element than the empty set the
empty set has no elements the power set
of the empty set has one element namely
the empty set
um
and
we
are looking at this um
to answer a question which i posed at
the end of last class namely we
all the sets we saw from the integers to
even numbers to rational numbers which
is on the
assignment
all have
the same cardinality as the natural
numbers
and that's what we call the accountably
infinite
um and so a question would be is there
any set
that is bigger than
in cardinality than the natural numbers
is there any set that's uncountable
and so this theorem due to cantor
answers that
and more and it says the following
if a is any set so if a is a set
then
cardinality of a is strictly smaller
than the cardinality of the power set of
a
okay and as a consequence so
so
consequence
is that the natural numbers
have smaller size than
the power set of the natural numbers
which has smaller size than the power
set
of the power set of the natural numbers
which is smaller in size than and so on
so there are
um an infinity of infinities there is an
infinitude of infinite sizes
consequence
i don't know if that's
okay
[Applause]
so
um
let's prove this theorem
and
it's uh
extremely clever and a bit mind-boggling
so
first let me prove that
a has cardinality less than or equal to
the cardinality of the power set of a so
let a be a set
first going to show that the cardinality
of a is less than or equal to the
cardinality of the power set of a
so
we need to find
an injection a one-to-one map from a
into the power set of a and the simplest
one to choose is
one that
takes an element of a
to
the set containing just
that element so define
f
from a into the power set of a
by
the function that
takes
x
and this should spit out a subset
of a
so
this will be the subset that consists
solely of x
okay
and this is clearly one to one
i'll prove this right now
then we need to prove that if f of x
equals f of y then x equals y but this
is sort of clear from the definition
then if f of x
equals f of y
this means
this set containing x this is by the
definition of how we've defined little f
means that the set containing x is equal
to the set containing y
but this
means x equals y they both contain one
element two sets are equal if and only
if that element is a
uh of one set as an element of the other
that just means x equals y in this
setting
thus
f is one to one
which
since we've found an injective map from
a to the power set of a
this means
okay
so
now we want to show that
they cannot have the same cardinality
we now show that
a does not have the same cardinality as
the power set of a
and
these two statements
are what is meant when we write down
recall the definition
of the
cardinality of a or size of a being
smaller than the cardinality of the
power set of a
okay
so
we're going to do this by
a proof by contradiction
so
proof by
contradiction
so that means
we're going to assume that
this does not hold and arrive at a false
statement
okay so
assume that
they do have the same cardinality so
this is our initial assumption we're
going to derive a false
statement
from this assumption
and the only way to arrive at a false
statement from a given
assumption in a logically consistent
fashion is that the original statement
namely this
is false
okay in other words
uh the thing we want to show is true
okay
so
let's assume uh they have the same
cardinality what does that mean
then uh there exists
a
bijective
function
b
going from a to
the power set of a remember a bijective
function means
that g is one to one and onto
okay one to one meaning different things
of a gets mapped to different things of
the power set onto means
everything in the power set
gets mapped onto from
a all right so really surjection the
fact that it's surjective is the only
thing i'm going to use
and i'm going to define a kind of a
weird set
and
we're going to look at this set so
define a set
b
and this is a subset of a
by b is the set of all x's in a
such that
x is not in f of x
all right
this should be g
okay so remember g maps from a to the
power set
so for any given x and a
g of x is a subset of a so the condition
to be in b
is that this element x is not in the
image of
itself by g
okay
and b could be empty all right
it could there could be no x's in a that
satisfy this
uh but it's just a subset of a
all right
i mean simply by definition we're just
looking at elements in a that satisfy a
certain condition
so since
it's a
subset of a
this means that it's a element
of the power set of a this is just how
the power set is defined remember it's
all subsets of a
so b is an element of the power set of a
therefore something
gets mapped to b
under this map okay
so
since g is
surjective
there exists
b in capital a
such that
g of little b equals capital b
okay
so this just follows from the fact that
g is a surjection meaning everything in
here must get mapped to by some element
in a
all right um
but now
let's take a look at this
b guy
there are two cases either
b is in
g of b or b is not in g of b
so
b is in
g of b
if b is in g of b remember this is equal
to capital b
all right by definition
and to be in capital b
means that
x is not in g of x
but
let me just write this again
this means b is in b which means
b is not in
g of b
so
we started off with
b and g of b and ended with b is not in
g of b
okay
so
we arrive at a false statement
in this case
then there's one other case b is not in
g of b
okay
then if b is not in g of b
this immediately implies by the
definition
of
capital
of little b
meaning g of b is in
capital b
so
let me write it this way
if b is not in g of b this follow then
from the definition of capital b
this implies that b is in
capital b
okay
that's just from the definition of
capital b
but now capital b is equal to g of
little b
which is another contradiction because
we started with
this
and ended with this
so
what i've really proven is
so let's ignore this contradiction mark
here
thus
we have shown that
b and g of b implies b not in g of b
b not in g of b implies b is in g of b
so we've
proven the statement that b is in g of b
if and only if b is not in g of b
and
this is a
very false statement
cannot have
uh
some object being in the set if and only
if it's not in the set
all right
so we've arrived at a false statement
and therefore
our initial assumption which led us
there namely that the
cardinality of the set a has the same
cardinality as the power set of a must
have been false
okay
so you know this is
it feels almost like you're being
hoodwinked a little bit with this proof
um
but
uh
kind of
to i don't know give you some sort of
um
cling or or connection back to reality
what's kind of underlying
this argument or or what's
what's one way of understanding this
argument is
to think about so in some sense what
this argument does is make you
talk about being in b
while having to also reference b itself
okay
and
um
maybe this seems a bit wild because this
is a math course but
you can do this statement just in the
english language if i am to tell you
that i am a liar
then if that statement is true
then what i just said namely that i am a
liar is false which means i'm not a liar
um therefore i am a liar implies i'm not
a liar
and vice versa just
if i say i am a liar
and that statement is
false meaning i'm not a liar then that
statement is true which implies i am a
liar
so of course i would not lie to you
um i would just give you alternative
facts
um
but
you know that statement is
kind of what's underlying this this
argument okay
so
maybe i'll put that there
true or false
okay that's kind of
uh
the connection to these two things
loosely is
or at least the logic is contained in
trying to verify
this statement
okay
so that's all
i'm going to say about cardinality we're
going to move on to
the real numbers now
and
so this is really like i said in a
previous lecture
our first uh real goal of the class
is to describe r
namely what exactly is the set of real
numbers
what characterizes a set of real numbers
and so let me state this as a theorem
just completely ahead of time so that
it's there
for us and this is kind of
our goal although we're not going to
prove it our goal is just to understand
what this theorem says so this is a
a
complete description of what r is there
exists a
unique
ordered field
containing
q
with the least upper bound
property
which we denote by r
a set of real numbers okay so
as you sit there and listen to this you
should shouldn't have
maybe you do but you really shouldn't
expect to have any idea about what this
theorem says what what all these words
mean
um
so
our goal
for this lecture
is to
make sense of these words
so the rest you should
understand
so
our goal for this lecture is to make
sense of these words ordered field least
upper bound property okay because these
are the two
um
these are the two
defining characteristics of r
all right and i'm not going to prove
this theorem
we're just going to take it as a given
okay
we could prove this theorem but it takes
um
quite a bit of time and i'd rather start
studying properties of r than building
are
this is
you know not so uncommon in math that
one is not especially interested in
you know the proof of actually
why certain things exist but we are
definitely interested in the properties
of that thing once we know it exists
so okay so let's get started on making
sense of what this theorem says
um
let's start off with
order
stuff okay this says ordered field least
upper bound property let's start off
with
um
what do i mean by order
we've kind of seen that just a little
bit already when we talked about the
natural numbers and this well ordering
uh property of the natural numbers
but i was just using words
to
label a certain property of the natural
numbers i didn't give i didn't say they
meant anything specifically it was just
a label for that but when i say order
now this will definitely mean something
ordered sets and fields
okay
so
definition
an ordered set
is a set s
with
a relation which we label with this less
than symbol
and this
relation satisfies two properties one is
you can always
check whether two elements are bigger
than each other or equal
so for all
x y and s
either
x equals y
x is less than y
or
that's just restating
y is less than x
okay
and
if x is less than y
and y is less than z
then
x is less than z
okay so an ordered set is just a set
with some relation
which
has two properties namely that for any
two elements in the set i can compare
the two that's basically what this says
and i have this
transitive property that if x is less
than y and y is less than z then x is
less than z
okay
and
so as i said before whenever you have
some sort of
um
mildly
interesting definition you should
definitely
try to come up with examples and
non-examples so what's the simplest
example
of
an ordered set
well the natural numbers which we
discussed earlier
but also the integers where
i have to define what this relation
means we say
m is less than n
uh
this
m is less than m if
m
minus m
is a natural number so this is how we
define
our order
so n is bigger than m if n minus m is a
natural number
okay
so and you can check that this is just
the usual ordering on z and that is
satisfies uh these two properties
um
the standard order on q
namely that
we'll say q is less than r
if
there exists
natural numbers m n such that
r minus q
equals m over n
okay
so these are just
the usual ordering orders of orderings
on the integers and rational numbers
that you're used to and that you know
i'm just writing out
exactly how one would define this order
and you can check just using this
definition of these orders that these
orders satisfy one and two
okay
now
a simple non-example
which is
a
i guess you could call a it's a relation
which satisfies two but not one
is the following so
let's take our set s
to be
concrete the power set of the natural
numbers
we define a relation
a
less than b
by
a is less than b if
a is a subset of b
okay
so i'm just defining a relation on the
power set
a less than b if
a is a subset of b and maybe i shouldn't
even use less than because this makes
you think that it's automatically in
order so
let's make it a script looking less
than um
then this relation is not an order
though it's uh
so
i keep saying order so
we usually refer to this um
relation as
an order
okay so
it's clear that it satisfies two
why because
a is a subset of b
b is a subset of c
then a is a subset of c
i e a
is less than c
okay
just follows from the definition of what
it means to be a subset of the other if
a is a subset of b
that means every element of a is an
element of b if b is an element of c
that means every element of b
is an element of c
and therefore every element of a is an
element of c
so
this relation satisfies the second
transitive property
but it doesn't satisfy
the first
i cannot
always measure
if
one thing is bigger than the other
because
why is this
for example the set containing zero
does not equal
the set containing one
[Applause]
but neither
of these things hold
okay so for
something to be in order or a set to be
an ordered set
uh it has to have this property that i
can always
compare two elements of this set
and for this relation
which seems like it could be an order it
satisfies the second property
it does not satisfy the first property
because i cannot
always compare two subsets of the
natural numbers
by saying one is a subset of the other
okay
so we just saw that we have two
sets which are not equal
but
one is not bigger than the other
okay
okay and so one more uh example
which again i will leave for you to to
check that uh
it does satisfy conditions one and two
just based on how it's defined
for example this is
the dictionary ordering
of
q
cartesian product q
um i think i wrote this down i mean you
should know what the cartesian product
is of two things but let me just uh
recall that
i have two sets
the cartesian product of a and b this is
the set of all ordered pairs
of elements from those sets
okay so the dictionary dictionary
ordering of q
is what so i need to define this uh
relation which i claim is an order
so
we'll say that
[Music]
a b is less than
q r
if
one of two things happens
if either
a is less than q
or
a equals q
and
b is less than r
okay
so dictionary ordering or alphabetical
ordering of q right you just check c
which is smaller first if they're both
equal then you check the next letter
and see which one's smaller there
okay
so
then
this relation that i've defined here
is an order
on
q cross q
making it an ordered set
okay
so this is what an ordered set is we'll
get to an ordered field in just a second
but now let's make sense or let me
define what i mean by this least upper
bound property and this is really what
sets r apart from q
so
we'll see in a minute that
both r and q are ordered fields so
that's not what separates r from q the
rational numbers but what does separate
are from q is the second property least
upper bound property so
you know if i said that there if i
removed that property and just said
there exists a unique ordered field
containing q that would just be q
all right
we don't need to add anything to it but
it's the second property this least
upper bound property
that
really
separates r from q
okay so
to define this i need to define what a
least upper bound is
so and this is all in the setting of an
ordered set
let s be
an ordered set
and let e be a subset of s
so i'm going to make a series of
definitions here
first
if there exists an element of s so not
the set necessarily the set i'm looking
at the subset i'm looking at
such that
for all x and e
x is less than or equal to b so here i
have this order less than less than or
equal to means just what it means in
english either x is less than v or x is
equal to b
and the same thing with bigger than or
equal to
um
and so on
but just keep in mind that
you know this order
is a
or this ordered set is a general ordered
set you know you could think of it as
the dictionary ordering on on q
across q so if there exists a b such
that for all x and e x is less than or
equal to b
then
we say that e
is bounded above
and
this element of b
is an upper bound
for e
okay
so if i can find some element of my set
bigger than
everything in
this set e i say e is bounded above and
b is an upper bound
i also have lower bounds
if there exists a b and s
such that
for all x and e
b is smaller than or equal to everything
in
uh
e so b is less than or equal to x
then
we say e is bounded below
and b is
a lower bound
for e
okay so b sits below everything
in e
[Applause]
okay
now
we call an element in s
the least
upper bound
for e if it satisfies two conditions
one is well if it's an up least upper
bound it should at least be an upper
bound
b is an upper bound for b
and it should be
in some sense the least of all upper
bounds so
if i take any other upper bound
b sub zero should sit below that one
okay
so
um
an element is the least upper bound for
set e if it's an upper bound and it's
the least among all other upper bounds
it sits below
every other upper bound
and
in this case we also say
b naught is the supremum
of e
and we write
b naught equals
soup e
now
this was having to deal with upper
bounds
we can also deal with lower bounds or we
also have a definition corresponding to
lower bounds for what would be the
greatest lower bound
so
we call an element of s
the
greatest lower bound
uh for e
if two conditions hold
which is kind of similar to the
conditions we had for least upper bound
except now
for lower bounds
be0 is a
lower bound for e
and it is the greatest of all lower
bounds
if
b is
any
lower bound for e
then
b is less than or equal to b zero
okay
and
so there's some latin name attached to
uh
at least upper bound so there's a latin
name attached to
greatest lower bound which we call the
infimum
we also call
b0
the infimum
of e and we write d zero equals
m e
all right so we have
it's mildly interesting and complex uh
definition which means
we should look
at some examples
to get a feel for it
okay so let's look
at some simple examples
so let's take our big ordered set to be
z
and let's take
our set e to be
one minus one zero
and two
okay
so
what about this guy uh what is the
supremum what is the infimum
so
you know
really if i'm going to prove or if i'm
going to make a statement
something is equal to the supremum or
something is equal to the infimum i
should actually give a proof of that
meaning if i say something's in femum or
something is a supremum then i need to
prove that it satisfies these two
conditions and these two conditions but
um
i'm just going over examples so i will
not
uh
give a full proof of that
this is just to get some intuition going
so
now first off
what would be
an upper bound for e
well three four five two is an upper
bound because two is bigger than or
equal to everything in the set
so
two three four five these are all upper
bounds for this set e
um
but what is the supremum meaning the
least upper bound well that would be two
right if i take anything less than two
that's not an upper bound because
there's something in the set bigger than
that
all right um
and if i take anything bigger than that
um
then this is going to be bigger than 2
but 2 is still an upper bound so 2 is
the least upper bound
now what about lower bounds well a lower
bound would be minus one
because minus one is bigger than
is less than or equal to everything in
the set but then so would be minus two
minus three
and so on
but the smallest i mean the greatest
lower bound would be minus one
okay
now let's do another example
[Applause]
let's
now look at
as the
rational numbers and let's take e to b
set of
rational numbers such that
0 is bigger than or equal to
i mean q is between zero and one uh
inclusive
okay so then what are some upper bounds
well
everything in e is less than or equal to
one so one is also
a perfectly good upper bound
three halves
five fourths
uh
six-fifths
um
seven-sixths anything bigger than
or equal to one is also an upper bound
for this set and the least upper bound
would be one
okay
so if i were to
try to draw q so or this set
let's not do that
now i know you usually draw the num this
line is for the real number line but
let's imagine uh it's q
so everything bigger than or equal to
one sits above everything in e
so
everything bigger than or equal to one
is an upper bound and at least upper
bound is one
uh what are some lower bounds
well
everything in the set e is bigger than
or equal to zero
uh so zero's a lower bound so is minus a
half
minus a third minus the fourth minus
fifth and so on
but
anything less than or equal to zero is a
lower bound nothing a bigger than zero
can be a lower bound because i can
always
find some so
this is uh not a proof but this is some
explanation
um
maybe i should have also said this for
the upper bound statement but anything
bigger than 0 is
not
at lower bound
because what if i take some number call
it r
uh
bigger than zero
and say
less than one
then
r cannot be a lower bound because
i can find something in e
less than r namely r over 2.
okay
so therefore
and we'll do we're going to do some
proofs where we actually have to get our
hands dirty and prove something is in
fema more the supremum
so you'll see how that works but for now
let's just go off of uh
intuition the infimum of this set
is zero
okay
now both of
these examples so far have
uh this property that
both the soup and the inf belong to the
set e that i'm looking at
but this is not necessarily always the
case
so
i could change this slightly so our
universe
the ordered set we're looking at
looking in is still q
and
the subset e is now
let's say
q is bigger than zero and less than one
okay
then
super v is still going to be 1. but this
is not an element of this set e it's of
course an element of s
this universe we're in but it's not an
element of the set e
and likewise the infimum is still zero
but it's not an element of e okay
so there are situations where you have a
set a subset of an ordered set
uh which has an infimum and supremum
which do not exist in this smaller set
you're looking at
whether or not the supremum or infimum
exists in the
universe that you're looking at in the
bigger set is an entirely different
issue
in fact that's uh
that's the next issue we're going to
talk about
okay so
um
let me just
reiterate what we saw a minute ago so
we can be in some ordered set
z or q and the set the smaller set which
we're taking the infant soup in
it could belong to
the smaller set for example in this case
1 and 0 were in the set e
uh or not you know there is this case
where neither of them were in e and of
course if i put less than or equal to
here then i would have the m in e
and
uh the soup not in e and then vice versa
so
ifs and soups of
these sets
don't necessarily need to belong to
that set you're looking at
but they at least existed
in the big set
queue um
now
big
ordered sets so this
ordered set that has this property that
the imp and soup
of bounded
above and below sets exist
in the bigger set always
is
what we call an ordered set with the
least upper bound property
so definition
ordered set s
as the
least
property
if every
subset of s which is non-empty
and bounded above
as a
supremum and
s
okay
so
uh a set has the least upper bound
property if every non-empty bounded set
has a supremum
okay
and
so
you know we could come up with simple
examples of
sets that do have
um the least upper bound
property for example let's take s to be
i mean this is kind of the simplest one
s with a single element
okay let's say zero um
here
you know
there's no order to put on it i mean
every element in here is equal to itself
and therefore every
non-empty
subset of s is just the whole set and
the supremum would then be that one
element
so this is kind of the silliest
uh
one you could do um
let's say
i mean you could have two elements
and then
if e is a subset of s e is uh
one of four guys
uh if e is a non-empty uh subset of s
here the
order is one zero is less than one
if e is equal to
zero then
b equals zero
if e is equal to one
soup e equals one
and
if e is equal to zero one
this implies
su e sub e equals 1. so this is in s
this is an s this is an s
okay
so every subset of s
which is not empty has a supremum in s
okay so
you know these are not
the most uh interesting examples of
sets with this least upper bound
property
so
for example
maybe a more interesting one would be if
i take s to be
let's say
put dots here
minus 3 minus 2 minus 1. so
let me just write it this way minus 1
minus 2 minus 3
minus 4
and so on
with
the usual ordering coming from the
integers so
minus 2 is less than -1
minus 3 is less than minus 2 and so on
i claim this set does have the
least upper bound property
why because if e is a subset of s
e
non-empty
um
in fact
so
both of these
you know this was always uh bounded
above because there's only two elements
and you can choose the biggest one one
every subset of s is also bounded above
by minus one so every subset of s is
automatically bounded above
so i just need to check that every
non-empty set
has a supremum in s
if e
is a subset of s and is non-empty
then
let me look at the set minus e i'm just
this is a label this is not meant to
mean anything
uh always i'm just this is a label which
is the set
of elements minus x
i take all my elements in e which is a
subset of the negative integers i take
their minuses this is now a subset of
natural numbers
and since
by the
well ordering
property of the natural numbers
there exists um
an element in minus e
such that
it sits below everything in minus c
for all x
and
e
which means that
for all x and e
x is less than or equal to minus m
and i'll let you think about this just
for a sec for a minute
but
so
m is in
remember m is in
minus e therefore minus m is in e
so
and m less than or equal to minus x for
all x and e implies that
for all x and capital e
x is less than or equal to minus m
and therefore i found an element
actually in the set capital e that's
bigger than or equal to everything in
the set
um you can convince yourself or
write down a formal proof if you like
that
uh this implies that
um minus m is therefore the supremum
okay
and so kind of using this uh trickery of
going from one
set that's bounded above to
a different set
kind of a subset of the natural numbers
you can also show for example z
is
as the
least upper bound property which i'm
going to
now shorten because those it's a lot of
things to write l-u-b-p least upper
bound property all right the integers
also have this property
um
but the integers are not all that
interesting again because i cannot
divide by an integer and stay in the set
okay um
you know
for what we want to do we want to be
able to add multiply
uh
subtract and divide
and we can't do that in the integers we
can do that
in the rational numbers
however
[Applause]
q does not have this property
so
um and we're going to prove this so
this is what
um
we're going to prove in a couple of
theorems here
but let me just put this out in front
q does not have the least upper bound
property
okay
and where does this come from
this comes from the simple fact which
you know if you believe you're
i don't want to call it greek mythology
but maybe it's greek mythology
strictly speaking that
some young guy discovered that the
square root of two is not a rational
number
and then he got thrown off a cliff um
that's who we have to thank for
um
showing us that q is not perfect that it
does have this algebraic property which
i just referenced the fact that you can
add subtract multiply and divide and
stay within the set
but
it does not have
square roots of
prime numbers but square root of 2 in it
and
this then manifests itself in this least
upper bound property
by
giving an example of a set which is
bounded above
which does not have
a supremum in the set q
so
basically
if e is the set of rational numbers so i
have not stated a theorem yet but i'm
just telling you what we're about to do
if e is a
this subset of rational numbers where
positive
and
q squared is less than two
then
soup e does not exist
in irrational numbers
okay so therefore we would have found a
set which is bounded above
which
does not have a supremum in the rational
numbers and therefore the rational
numbers do not have the least upper
bound property
so
this is what we're going to do
and i'll prove
state a couple of theorems that
spell all this out so
first i'm going to prove a theorem
about a
what the supremum of such a set would
have to satisfy
so
if x is in q
so this is a statement of a theorem if x
is in q
and
if x equals the supremum of this set
then
x is bigger than or equal to one
and
x squared equals two
okay
so
so we're just saying i mean i'm not you
know don't
try to take this as uh necessarily
contradicting what i wrote there
because that was not a statement of a
theorem yet i'm stating this theorem
that if i have such a supremum and q
of this set then it would have to square
and give me two okay
um
not saying such a element exists i'm
just saying if there is any element of q
that is the supremum of this set then it
has to be bigger than or equal to one
and it squares two so let's let's give a
proof of this
and because um
i don't want to keep writing this set
again so i'm going to use the notation
um so
that i
use in the comments
let e be the set that i'm interested in
so this should be
and
suppose we have
an element of q
which is the supremum of e
so first off what would be one element
of e what's one rational number whose
square is less than two
one
so
since
one is in e square is less than two
and
x is
the supremum of e
meaning it's an upper bound for e it
must be bigger than or equal to
everything in e
in particular for 1
that implies x is bigger than or equal
to 1. so that's the first part of the
theorem we want to prove
so now we're going to prove um
two inequalities okay to show that x
squared is is actually equal to two
we're going to prove so this is a common
uh
you know trick and analysis uh that if i
have two things that i would like to
show equal to each other
sometimes a way to show that is by
showing one is less than or equal to
that
and this is less than or equal to that
okay so
one side is less than or equal to the
other side and vice versa
okay
and which immediately implies they must
equal each other
okay
so
that's what we're going to do and we're
going to now prove that
x squared is
bigger than or equal to 2.
all right we'll then prove that x
squared is less than or equal to 2.
and therefore x squared equals 2.
so to do this
we'll do this by contradiction
so let's assume
um
so
everything else we've done so far is
still true but now we want to prove this
statement so we're going to assume that
this statement is false
assume that x squared
is less than two
so
i'm going to define
a certain rational number h
which
it's a smaller of two rational numbers
it's going to be the smaller of one-half
and
two minus x squared over
two over two x plus one
and let me just reiterate this is less
than one because it's the smaller of one
half and this number
okay
now when you write a proof as you'll see
it's going to be magic that somehow this
h does something magical um
that's not exactly how you come up with
proofs what how it comes up you know is
you take an inequality that you want to
mess with you fiddle around with it and
you see that if h is given by something
then it breaks the inequality
okay
or it satisfies the inequality which
whichever one you're trying to do
so
okay since x squared is
less than two
h is positive
right it's the minimum of a half
and this number so if it's a half it's
positive if it's this one then it's
still positive
okay
and
what i'm going to prove now is that x
plus h
is an e its square is less than two okay
this will give us our contradiction
because x is supposed to be an upper
bound for e
and therefore x is supposed to be bigger
than or equal to x plus h but this is x
plus a positive number x plus a positive
number is
bigger than x
so
how do we do this well we have to
compute the square of this and show it's
less than two and that's kind of where
our
choice of h comes from
we compute
that x plus h
squared
this is x squared plus 2xh plus h
now
this is
less than
x squared plus two x h
plus h
why because h times h
is less than h since h is less than one
so this is kind of why
uh we chose h to be less than one so
that i can get rid of this square and
somehow just have a single h floating
around which i can then use to show
uh x plus h is in e
okay
so then this
uh
so when i write the string of
inequalities this thing is supposed to
be equal to the next thing this is not
saying x plus h squared is equal to what
i'm about to write now
um so this is equal to x squared
plus
2x plus 1
times h
now h is the minimum of these two
numbers
right
so
h is going to be smaller than
or equal to
this thing
and
so this is 2 minus x squared
over 2.
write it this way
so i have what i had before
and then times two minus x squared over
two
two x plus
one
okay so now some magic is happening this
cancels with that and i have 2 minus x
squared over 2 which is less than 2
minus x squared so less than
x squared
plus
2 minus x squared because i took a half
of it
equals two
all right
so summarizing we started off with x
plus h squared and we showed it was less
than two
and therefore
x plus h is an e
but if i have
an element of e
let's see where are we on space
[Applause]
but i have an element of e
which is
bigger than x
so that implies that x
is not equal to
the supremum of the set okay remember by
definition something is the supremum if
it's an upper bound
for the set okay something's not an
upper bound if
uh you can find something in the set
bigger
than b not and this is also a good
exercise to do when you come up when you
come across a new definition is to try
and negate it to understand it a little
bit better so
let me write here next to b is an upper
bound for e let me write what this means
actually here
let me write this here
d naught is not
so what's the negation of being an upper
bound
so not an upper bound for e
if
there exists an x and e
such that
x is bigger than
b naught
okay so we have found an element
so going back to our proof we have found
an element of our set e which is bigger
than x
which means that x is not the supremum
of e
which is a contradiction to our initial
to our assumption this is
these are assumptions for the theorem so
we're always assuming this
okay
so this is a contradiction
thus
our assumption that x squared bigger
than or equal to 2 i mean less than 2
which is different from our
assumptions of the theorem
is false
okay
okay so now we want to prove that x
squared equals two
so
we now show x squared equals 2.
since x squared so this is not exactly
the proof just i'm going to rewrite it a
little differently so it's maybe clear
that
instead of showing also x squared is
less than or equal to 2 which we know
the less than cannot happen
let's just show that x squared cannot be
bigger than 2.
since x squared is bigger than or equal
to 2 this means
either x squared equals 2 which we want
to show
or x squared is bigger than 2.
so let's rule out this case
we now show that the case x squared
bigger than 2 cannot hold
so suppose otherwise we're going to do
this this is going to be a proof by
contradiction as well
i guess when i say x squared bigger than
2 cannot hold i'm also saying x squared
must be less than or equal to 2.
but anyways so let's show this cannot
hold
so we're going to do this by
contradiction as well
so we're trying to show this cannot hold
so let's
assume that it does hold
so that's
the negation of what we want to show
which is this statement that x squared
greater than 2 does not hold
so assume x squared is bigger than 2.
so what we're going to do is we're going
to find
an upper bound for the set e which is
strictly smaller than x
and
we have to do that next time because i
think i'm about to run out of time
so okay so i hate to to stop the proof
here
but we'll finish this
in the next lecture